File:Ted Nude Gent.jpg
Licensing[edit]
This image is a screenshot from a copyrighted film, and the copyright for it is most likely owned by the studio which produced the film, and possibly also by any actors appearing in the screenshot. It is believed that the use of a limited number of low-resolution screenshots
for critical commentary and discussion of the film and its contents
on the English-language Wikipedia, hosted on servers in the United States by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation,
qualifies as fair use under the Copyright law of the United States. Any other uses of this image, on Wikipedia or elsewhere, may be copyright infringement. See Wikipedia:Non-free content for more information.To the uploader:
Please add a detailed non-free use rationale for each article the image is used in, which must also declare compliance with the other parts of the non-free content criteria, as well as the source of the work and copyright information.
For example non-free use rationales, see Wikipedia:Use rationale examples.
This is only for images which are screenshots from films.
To patrollers and administrators: If this image has an appropriate rationale please append |image has rationale=yes as a parameter to the license template.Fair usetrue
Source : Screenshot from a DVD copy of Austin Powers: International Man Of Mystery created and uploaded by Barfbagger. Image copyright for the film is owned by the New Line Cinema.
Rationale for the fair use of this image in the article Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery:
No free or public domain images have been located for this film.
The screenshot is intended to represent a well known character(s) and significant scene in a well known and significant film. The scene is significant because it is a parody of scenes from other films. For this article to attempt to present a more complete discussion of the film and its main characters, Dr. Evil and his Sphynx cat need to be adequately discussed and illustrated.
The image is used for informational purposes only and is not believed to detract from the original film in any way.