Scratching post
Object for cats to relieve skin irritation
For the band, see Scratching Post (band).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Scratching post" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A scratching post is a wooden post covered in rough material that cat owners provide so their pets have an acceptable place to scratch.
Cats have a natural urge to scratch:[1] the action helps them remove old material from their claws, and they mark territory with scent glands in their paws. Indoor cats may be prevented from exercising this urge on furniture if they are provided with an acceptable scratching post.
Homemade scratching post
The most common type of post consists of a wooden post, roughly 60–90 cm (24–36 inches) tall, covered in rough fabric or sisal.
The post is mounted vertically in a wide base, which allows the cat to stretch upward on its rear legs and scratch freely without tipping it over. A post that is unstable or does not allow a cat to fully extend its body might put off the cat from using it. Surfaces vary: the post may be covered in sisal rope, upholstery fabric, or the jute backing of a piece of carpet. Many pet owners say they have to experiment with different surfaces to find one that their cats will scratch reliably. Experts[who?] say that cats generally prefer sisal or corrugated cardboard surfaces.[1] Other kinds of scratching posts are more elaborate, with several levels of horizontal platforms for climbing and cozy cave-like areas where cats may hide.
Very tall ones are often called "cat trees."
These may have a vertical tension rod that extends to the ceiling to provide extra stability.
Smaller scratching surfaces may consist of something as simple as a piece of carpet turned upside down, or a flat pad of woven sisal with a loop to allow it to hang from a doorknob.
Others are made from corrugated fiberboard.
Scratching posts may be purchased at most stores that carry pet supplies and online, like Amazon, Walmart, and Target and other stores. However, many people construct their own.
Types[edit]
A corrugated fiberboard scratching pad
A wickerwork cat pole
A variety of scratching posts for sale at a cat show
An actual tree trunk used as a scratching post
Cat tree with 2 cats
See also[edit]
Cat tree
References[edit]
^ "What To Do If Your Cat Scratches".
This pet-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte
This felid-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte