LOLCat Bible Translation Project
Wiki-based Bible parody
LOLCat Bible Translation ProjectFull nameLOLCat Bible Translation ProjectOther namesLOLcat Bible: In teh beginnin Ceiling Cat maded teh skiez an da Erfs n stuffsComplete Biblepublished2010Textual basisNone[note 1]Translation typeComplete re-imagining[note 2]Reading levelUnknownPublisherUlysses PressCopyright© 2007, 2010 Martin GrondinWebsitewww.lolcatbible.com at the Wayback Machine (archived 2019-03-27)Genesis 1:1–3
Oh hai. In teh beginnin Ceiling Cat maded teh skiez An da Urfs, but he did not eated dem.
Da Urfs no had shapez An haded dark face, An Ceiling Cat rode invisible bike over teh waterz.
At start, no has lyte. An Ceiling Cat sayz, i can haz lite? An lite wuz.
John 3:16
So liek teh Ceiling Kitteh lieks teh ppl lots and he sez 'Oh hai I givez u me only kitteh and ifs u beleeves him u wont evr diez no moar, kthxbai!'
The LOLCat Bible Translation Project was a wiki-based website set up in July 2007 by Martin Grondin, where editors aim to parody the entire Bible in "LOLspeak", the slang popularized by the LOLcat Internet phenomenon.[1] The project relies on contributors to adapt passages. As of March 27, 2008, approximately 61% of the text had been adapted, and Grondin stated that he hoped the entire New Testament would be complete by the end of 2008.[2]
A book version of the website was released in 2010, containing selected extracts such as the stories of the creation of the earth, Adam and Eve, and Noah.[3]
Writing process[edit]
In the process of adaptation, various changes were made to the source material, for example, changing the main characters to cats – e.g., Jesus Christ becomes "Happy Cat", God the "Ceiling Cat", and Satan the "Basement Cat" – while the "gifts" and "blessings" of God have become "cheezburgerz", and people in general have become "kittehs".[2][note 3]
The style of writing employed varies, but the most devoted contributors were described as those who utilized as many as possible of the gags and themes used in the different lolcat images.[2]
Unlike most Bible translation efforts, the LOLCat Bible Translation Project did not depend on one translator or a group of prominent ones, but on crowdsourced translation. Untranslated sections were available for translation by anyone willing to register on the wiki.
Critical response[edit]
The project was praised by Ben Huh, owner of the website that popularized lolcats,[4] icanhascheezburger.com, who noted that the LOLCat Bible had inspired other religious texts to be translated into LOLspeak, such as the Qur'an, and that it has made clear that "the ability to publish is now open to anyone".[2] An editorial in the Chicago Tribune commented, "The effort to translate the Bible into a language full of grammatical errors, hacker acronyms and Internet lingo may appear distasteful or blasphemous to some, but not to worry. Much of the translation only loosely follows the Bible. It's crowded with references to lolcats pictures and to ambiguous Internet humor, and these references can only be understood by people who spend too much time on the Web."[5]
See also[edit]
The Brick Bible
Notes[edit]
^ As evidenced by the quotations given, it is incorrect to speak of a "textual basis" in the usual sense (such as the Nestle-Aland Novum Testamentum Graece, or even "varied English Bible translations and LOL-cat memes", albeit the latter is likely accurate).
^ Into "LOL-speak", a highly ungrammatical and misspelled form of internet humor and internet slang. Only very loosely based in the Biblical narrative, but instead a derivative work inspired by the Bible, full of references to the "LOL-cats" internet memes (see below reference); thus not a translation or paraphrase of the actual Biblical text, as evidenced by the quotation of Genesis given, which bears no resemblance to any actual passage in Genesis.
^ Other changes include "Hover Cat" for the Holy Spirit and "Bird Cats" for angels.
The use of "cheezburgers" is an allusion to the I Can Has Cheezburger? meme.
References[edit]
^ Guzman, Monika (2007-10-19). "Time Killer: The "lolcat" bible". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on 2008-04-15. Retrieved 2007-12-23.
^ a b c d Amter, Charlie (2007-12-16). "Lolcat Bible Translation Project presents the Gospel according to Fluffy". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2007-12-24. Retrieved 2007-12-23.
Also available here Archived 2011-03-03 at the Wayback Machine at latimes.com under the title "It's the Gospel according to kittah".
^ [1] Archived 2020-12-07 at the Wayback Machine Ceiling Cat Maek Awl teh Stuffz], p. 14; Adam An Eve Archived 2020-12-07 at the Wayback Machine, p. 17; Noah's Reely Big Bowt Archived 2020-12-07 at the Wayback Machine, p.26. Accessed 2013-08-15
^ "Lolcats' demented captions create a new Web language", Tamara Ikenberg, The News Journal, 9 July 2007
^ "The Gospel according to kitty". Chicago Tribune. 2008-01-01. Archived from the original on 2008-01-17. Retrieved 2010-12-07.
External links[edit]
LOLCat Bible Translation Project at the Wayback Machine (archived 2019-03-27)
vteEnglish-language translations of the Bible5th–11th century
Wessex Gospels
Hatton Gospels
Old English Hexateuch
Old English Bible translations
Middle English
Wycliffe
Middle English Bible translations
16th–17th century
Tyndale
Coverdale
Matthew
Great Bible
Taverner
Geneva
Bishops'
Douay–Rheims (DRV)
King James (KJV)
18th–19th century
Challoner
Brenton's Septuagint
Webster's
Young's Literal (YLT)
Revised (RV)
Living Oracles
Darby
Emphatic Diaglott
Joseph Smith
Quaker
Julia E. Smith Parker Translation
20th century
American Standard (ASV)
Rotherham's Emphasized
Ferrar Fenton
Moffatt, New Translation
Knox
Basic English (BBE)
Revised Standard (RSV)
Anchor
New World (NWT)
Modern Language (MLB)
New English (NEB)
Living English (BLE)
New American Standard (NASB)
Good News (GNB)
Jerusalem (JB)
New American (NAB)
Living
New International (NIV)
New Century (NCV)
Bethel
New King James (NKJV)
New Jerusalem (NJB)
Green's Literal Translation (GLT)
Recovery
Christian Community (CCB)
New Revised Standard (NRSV)
Revised English (REB)
Contemporary English (CEV)
The Message (MSG)
Clear Word (TCW)
New Life (NLV)
21st Century King James (KJ21)
Third Millennium (TMB)
New International Reader's (NIrV)
New International Inclusive Language
God's Word
New Living (NLT)
Heinz Cassirer's translation
Complete Jewish Bible
International Standard (ISV)
Holman Christian Standard (HCSB)
Easy-to-Read Version (ERV)
The Holy Bible from Ancient Eastern Manuscripts
Hebrew Bible
Jewish Publication Society of America Version
New Jewish Publication Society of America Tanakh
New Testament
Worrell
Phillips
Partial
Four Prophets (Phillips)
21st century
World English (WEB)
World Messianic
English Standard (ESV)
Today's New International (TNIV)
New English (NET)
Ignatius (RSV2CE)
The Voice
Common English (CEB)
Apostolic Bible Polyglot
Open English (OEB)
New American Bible Revised Edition (NABRE)
Lexham English
The Orthodox Jewish
Original Aramaic Bible in Plain English
Divine Name King James
Names of God
Tree of Life Bible
Modern English (MEV)
Literal English (LEV)
Christian Standard (CSB)
Revised New Jerusalem (RNJB)
Evangelical Heritage (EHV)
New Heart English Bible, Jehovah Edition (NHEB-JE)
Legacy Standard (LSB)
Antioch Bible
Hebrew Bible
Alter
Septuagint
New English Translation of the Septuagint
Study Bibles
Haydock Bible
Life Application Study Bible
Oxford Annotated Bible
Reformation Study Bible
Scofield Reference Bible
Thompson Chain-Reference Bible
Dake Annotated Reference Bible
Logos International Study Bible
Hebrew-Greek Key Word Study Bible
MacArthur Study Bible
Ryrie Study Bible
The Wesley Study Bible
The Lutheran Study Bible
Orthodox Study Bible
Study Bible for NIV
Study Bible for ESV
Study Bible for NLT
Study Bible for GNT
New Interpreter's Study Bible
Reflecting God Study Bible
Archaeological Study Bible
The Life with God Study Bible
The Green Bible
Picture Bibles
The Brick Bible
The Manga Bible
The Action Bible
Modern Dialectal & Slang
Glasgow
LOLCat
Notable publishers
Cambridge University Press
Oxford University Press
American Bible Society
Zondervan
Thomas Nelson
Tyndale House
HarperCollins
Holman
Lockman Foundation
Crossway
Hendrickson Publisher
Ignatius Press
Saint Benedict Press
Baronius Press
Additional lists
List of English Bible translations
Old English (pre-1066)
Middle English (1066–1500)
Early Modern English (1500–1800)
Modern Christian (1800–)
Modern Jewish (1853–)