Feline vaccination
Vaccination of cats
Feline vaccination is animal vaccination applied to cats. Vaccination plays a vital role in protecting cats from infectious diseases, some of which are potentially fatal. They can be exposed to these diseases from their environment, other pets, or even humans.
Principles guiding vaccination recommendations[edit]
The practice of recommending and giving vaccines on a fixed schedule with annual boosters has been widely discarded. Current recommendations are based on the philosophy of vaccinating each cat no more frequently than necessary. These recommendations take into account considerations for the efficacy and duration of immunity (DOI)[1] of available vaccines; environmental risks and likelihood of exposure; the specific needs and risks associated with age and overall health status of different cats and cat populations; and socioeconomic limitations.[2][3][4][5]
Recommendation vary for:
Shelters
Owned pets (and based on "inside only", "in and out", or "out only")
Breeders
Boarding facilities (or animals going into them)
Feral cats
Community cats
TNR (trap–neuter–return) program
Specific consideration may be required for:
Travel plans
Underlying disease conditions of the specific cat
Pregnant or lactating/nursing cats
Multi-cat households or kitten foster homes
Core vs non-core vaccines[edit]
Core vaccines are ones that are considered "essential for health" and are recommended for both indoor and outdoor owned domestic cats, as well as community and feral cats. These include:
Feline panleukopenia (FPV or FPLV, aka feline parvo or feline distemper)
Feline viral rhinotracheitis (FHV, aka herpes virus)
Feline calicivirus (FCV)
Rabies (where the disease is endemic or required by law)
Non-core vaccines are recommended only for cats at risk of specific infection. These include:
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
Chlamydia felis
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Schedules for vaccinations[edit]
National, international, and global vaccination guidelines by professional veterinary advisory boards are regularly updated and available for on-line viewing or download. These include:
World Small Animal Veterinary Association (WSAVA): Guidelines for the vaccination of dogs and cats
American Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP) Feline Vaccination Advisory Panel Report: Feline Vaccination Guidelines Archived 2013-08-27 at the Wayback Machine
European Advisory Board of Cat Diseases (ABCD): Vaccines and Vaccinations
UK: The National Office of Animal Health (NOAH): Vaccination for animal health Archived 2020-07-31 at the Wayback Machine
These guides provide recommendations for kittens and adult cats. They include initial requirements to establish adequate levels of acquired immunity, along with renewal (booster) recommendations to retain it. For some infectious diseases, blood samples can be used to measure antibody levels (titers) to determine DOI.[1] Though these tests do not provide evidence of protective immunity, some clinicians use high titer results as an indicator, along with low disease exposure risk that vaccines might be administered at a longer than usual revaccination interval.[6]
Types of vaccines[edit]
Numerous types and brands of commercial vaccines are available to induce acquired immunity. These include:
Modified-live virus (MLV or "infectious") non adjuvated
MLV adjuvated
Killed virus ("non-infectious") adjuvated
Killed virus non adjuvated.
Combination vaccines that provide protection against several common viruses are also available.
Selection or use of a specific type/brand of vaccine may vary depending on the overall risk of viral infection to the specific animal in its environment, along with considerations for the time it takes to confer protection, its overall efficacy, the animal's health, and the potential risks associated with MLV vs killed, adjuvated vs non adjuvated, intranasal/ocular vs injection.
Administration of vaccines[edit]
The laws as to who may acquire and give vaccines varies in different countries. Some may only be acquired and given by a licensed veterinarian, others by owners or caretakers.
The vaccine delivery method/route may vary. They may be given by injection, dermal application, or nasal/ocular application. Injection routes may be intra-muscular (IM) or subcutaneous (SQ). The specific injection site may vary depending on the type of vaccine (MLV vs killed) being given.
Reactions to vaccines[edit]
Vaccines must undergo safety trials to receive licensing and are considered very safe. A very small percentage of animals may have an adverse reaction. All advisory boards mentioned above strongly endorse the view that the benefits far outweigh the risks of not vaccinating an animal.[citation needed]
Normal reactions[edit]
After vaccinations are administered, cats may experience mild and short-lived reactions such as poor appetite, lethargy, and fever. Any symptoms that persist for more than a day or two should be discussed with a veterinarian.[7] Sometimes, for injected vaccines, a small, non-painful lump may form at the site where the vaccine was injected which usually disappears within four weeks.[6]
Adverse (abnormal) reactions[edit]
Adverse events include any injury caused by the vaccine.[2]
Rarely, a cat will have an allergic reaction to a vaccine. This may include facial itchiness, or be a generalized allergic reaction that includes vomiting, diarrhea, breathing difficulties, and extremely rarely, collapse. Should any of these occur, contact your veterinarian immediately. Anaphylactic reactions are rarely fatal if treated in a timely fashion. If an allergic reaction occurs, future vaccinations may be amended by type or preceded by an allergy medicine.[7]
Another uncommon reaction is the development of a vaccine-associated fibrosarcoma, a tumor at the injection site that develops months or years after vaccination.[7]
Adverse events should be reported, whether their association with vaccination is recognized or only suspected. Veterinarians are encouraged to report any clinically significant adverse event occurring during or after administration of any licensed vaccine.[2]
The report, identifying the product, batch, animal and reaction involved, should be submitted to the manufacturer of the vaccine and to the appropriate regulatory agency.
References[edit]
^ a b "Efficacy and effectiveness". Immunisation Advisory Centre. July 26, 2016.
^ a b c Day, M. J.; Horzinek, M. C.; Schultz, R. D.; Squires, R. A. (2016). "WSAVA Guidelines for the vaccination of dogs and cats". Journal of Small Animal Practice. 57 (1): E1–E45. doi:10.1111/jsap.2_12431. ISSN 1748-5827. PMC 7166872. PMID 26780857.
^ "Feline Vaccination Advisory Panel Report | American Association of Feline Practitioners". catvets.com. Retrieved 2019-03-16.
^ "Vaccines and vaccination – an introduction |". Retrieved 2019-03-16.
^ "Vaccination for animal health: an overview". NOAH (National Office of Animal Health). Retrieved 2019-03-16.
^ a b "CVMA | Documents | Vaccination and Your Cat". www.canadianveterinarians.net. Retrieved 2019-03-16.
^ a b c "Vaccinations for Your Cat". 2013.
vteDomestic catsFelinology
Anatomy
Genetics
Dwarf cat
Kitten
Odd-eyed cat
Squitten
Coat genetics
Bicolor cat
Black cat
Calico cat
Tabby cat
Tortoiseshell cat
Health
Aging
Declawing
Diet
dental health
senior
Vaccination
Behavior
Cat–dog relationship
Catfight
Catnip
valerian
Communication
Meow
Purr
Kneading
Intelligence
Play and toys
Righting reflex
Senses
Human–catinteraction
Ailurophobia
Cat cafés
Cat killers
Cat massage
Cat meat
Cat-scratch disease
Cat show
Cats in ancient Egypt
Cultural depictions
fictional
Internet
Feral cat
Cats and Islam
Lolcat
National Cat Day
Pet cat
Puppy cat
Working cat
Bodega cat
Farm cat
Library cat
Ship's cat
Zoonosis
Registries
American Cat Fanciers Association
Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana
Canadian Cat Association
Cat Aficionado Association
Cat Fanciers' Association
Fédération Internationale Féline
Governing Council of the Cat Fancy
New Zealand Cat Fancy
Southern Africa Cat Council
The International Cat Association
World Cat Congress
World Cat Federation
Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic
Abyssinian
American Curl
American Shorthair
Balinese
Brazilian Shorthair
British Shorthair
Birman
Bombay
Burmese
Burmilla
California Spangled
Chartreux
Chinese Li Hua
Colorpoint Shorthair
Cornish Rex
Cymric
Devon Rex
Donskoy
Egyptian Mau
European Shorthair
Exotic Shorthair
German Rex
Himalayan
Japanese Bobtail
Javanese
Khao Manee
Korat
Kurilian Bobtail
Lykoi
Maine Coon
Manx
Munchkin
Neva Masquerade
Norwegian Forest
Ocicat
Ojos Azules
Oriental Shorthair
Persian
Peterbald
Pixie-bob
Ragdoll
Ragamuffin
Russian Blue
Scottish Fold
Selkirk Rex
Siamese
Siberian
Singapura
Snowshoe
Somali
Sphynx
Thai
Traditional Persian
Tonkinese
Toyger
Turkish Angora
Turkish Van
Hybrid
Bengal
Chausie
Highlander
Savannah
Serengeti
Landraces
Aegean
Cyprus
Domestic long-haired
Domestic short-haired
Kellas
Sokoke
Van
Diseases anddisorders
Acne
Asthma
Calicivirus
Congenital sensorineural deafness
Feline corneal sequestrum
Flea
Coccidia
Heartworm
Hepatic lipidosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Immunodeficiency virus
Infectious peritonitis
Leukemia virus
Lower urinary tract disease
Panleukopenia
Giardiasis
Polydactyly
Rabies
Ringworm
Tritrichomonas foetus
Roundworm
Skin disorders
Tick
Toxoplasmosis
Viral rhinotracheitis
Cats by country
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
United Kingdom
United States
Related
List of individual cats
List of oldest cats
Cats in folklore
Category