Cat lady
Single woman who owns many pet cats
"Crazy cat lady" redirects here. For the Simpsons character, see List of recurring The Simpsons characters § Crazy Cat Lady. For the syndrome, see Crazy cat lady syndrome. For the video game, see The Cat Lady.
Not to be confused with Catgirl or Catwoman.
A woman feeding cats in Rome
A cat lady is a cultural archetype or stock character, most often depicted as a white woman, a middle-aged or elderly spinster or widow, who has many cats. The term may be pejorative, or it may be affectionately embraced.
Usage and association[edit]
"The old woman and her cats", 1811
Women who have cats have long been associated with the concept of spinsterhood, widowhood or even witchcraft. In more recent decades, the concept of a cat lady has been associated with "romance-challenged (often career-oriented) women".[1] Specifically, it has also been embraced by lesbians.[2]
A cat lady may also be an animal hoarder who keeps large numbers of cats without having the ability to properly house or care for them.[3] They may be ignorant about their situation, or generally unaware of their situation. People who are aware of it are not normally considered cat ladies.
Depending on context, the ordinarily pejorative word "crazy" may be prepended to "cat lady" to indicate either a pejorative[1] or a humorous and affectionate label.[4] Some writers, celebrities, and artists have challenged the
gender-based "Crazy Cat Lady" stereotype, and embraced the term to mean an animal lover or rescuer who cares for one or multiple cats, and who is psychologically healthy.[5][6][7]
Documentary[edit]
The documentary Cat Ladies (2009) tells the stories of four women whose lives became dedicated to their cats. The film was directed by Christie Callan-Jones and produced by Chocolate Box Entertainment, originally for TVOntario. It was an official selection at the 2009 Hot Docs Festival, Silverdocs Festival, and San Francisco's DocFest.[8][9]
Naftali Berrill, Ph.D., Director of the New York Center for Neuropsychology and Forensic Behavioral Science, told AOL Health, "These may be people who have a very hard time expressing themselves to other people. They may find the human need for affection is met most easily through a relationship with a pet." This devotion can sometimes signal mental or emotional issues such as depression.[10]
Toxoplasma gondii[edit]
Some studies indicate a link between the parasite Toxoplasma gondii, which sexually reproduces exclusively in cats, and numerous psychiatric conditions, including obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and schizophrenia,[11][12]
whereas other studies have showed that T. gondii is not a causative factor in later psychoses.[13][14]
The compulsive hoarding of cats, a symptom of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), has long been associated with "crazy cat ladies".[15]
Crazy cat-lady syndrome is a term coined by news organizations to describe scientific findings that link Toxoplasma gondii to several mental disorders and behavioral problems.[11][16]
Notable examples[edit]
Florence Nightingale had many cats named after famous public figures such as Gladstone and Bismarck.[17]
Edith Ewing Bouvier and her daughter Edith Bouvier Beale had many cats living with them in their decrepit home Grey Gardens. Reportedly, some 30 cats lived in the house by the time Little Edie sold it in 1979.[18]
Bertha Rand was Winnipeg's notorious Cat Lady, who for years battled her neighbours and city hall to save her dozens of cats; even years after her death, she still holds a place in Canadian popular culture.[19] Maureen Hunter's play The Queen of Queen Street is based on Rand's life.[20]
Cultural references[edit]
This section may contain irrelevant references to popular culture. Please remove the content or add citations to reliable and independent sources. (June 2023)
Cat ladies in popular culture include:
General[edit]
Catwoman:
A recurring supervillain or anti-hero character that most often appears in the Batman franchise in comics, films and television.
Television[edit]
In the Adventures of Superman episode "Olsen's Millions" has Jimmy Olsen receiving a reward for rescuing a cat belonging to Mrs. Peabody (portrayed by Elizabeth Patterson), a Metropolis cat lady.
"Grandma Puggy" (portrayed by Steve Martin) is a widowed grandmother who had cats everywhere and whose hair got on the guests.
In Codename: Kids Next Door, the Crazy Old Cat Lady (voiced by Grey DeLisle) is a half-human half-feline villain who lives with thousands of black and white cats and possesses the power to control them.
In the CSI: Crime Scene Investigation episode "Cats in the Cradle", a cat lady named Ruth Elliot (portrayed by Ellen Geer) is revealed to have been murdered by a young girl named Jessica Trent (portrayed by Courtney Jines) after she and her sister Jackie (portrayed by Jennette McCurdy) wanted a cat which Ruth was unwilling to part with as she considered it one of her children.
Angela Martin is a character on The Office who is a cat lady.
In The Simpsons, the Crazy Cat Lady (voiced by Tress MacNeille) is a recurring character whose real name is Eleanor Abernathy.
In the Disney Channel series The Suite Life on Deck, schoolteacher Emma Tutweiller (Erin Cardillo) has 30 cats in her cabin.
Jefferson (portrayed by Tyler, The Creator) from the Adult Swim TV series Loiter Squad is a cat person.
In Futurama, Hattie McDoogal (voiced by Tress MacNeille) is an old woman who lives alone with her cats and often uses nonsense words and phrases, such as "kerjigger". She briefly serves as the landlady of Fry and Bender, and holds a single share of Planet Express, allowing her the decisive vote for its CEO. MacNeille also voices the Crazy Cat Lady on The Simpsons.
In The Loud House, Rita Loud's aunt Ruth (voiced by Grey DeLisle) is a cat lady.
In Crazy Ex-Girlfriend, the episode "Trent?!" features a musical number where the main character Rebecca and her friends make jokes about being cat ladies after Rebecca cuts off her sexual relationship.[citation needed]
Film[edit]
In a key scene in A Clockwork Orange (1971), the violent sociopath Alex DeLarge murders a paranoid cat lady, for which he is convicted and sentenced to a prison term during which he undergoes behavioral training to become a vastly different person.
In the black comedy The End (1978), Sally Field portrays Burt Reynolds' distracted cat lady girlfriend Mary Ellen, who is too absorbed in her feline pets to react to Burt's news that he is dying.
In a scene in Tim Burton's Batman Returns (1992) after being pushed to her breaking point by Max Schreck, Selina Kyle (portrayed by Michelle Pfeiffer) transforms from a cat lady into Catwoman.
In Catwoman (2004), Patience Phillips (portrayed by Halle Berry) visits a cat lady who tells her about how to embrace her new identity as Catwoman, claiming an Egyptian Mau called Midnight chose to give her cat-like superpowers.
In The Lego Movie (2014), Mrs. Scratchen-Post is a cat lady minifigure who is one of Emmet Brickowski's neighbors.
In Free Guy, the video game Free City has a cat lady named Phyllis (portrayed by Anabel Graetz) where she needs help from the players to find her cats.
In Puss in Boots: The Last Wish, when Puss in Boots is informed that he has one life left, he retreats to live in the house of cat lady Mama Luna.
Music[edit]
On Venetian Snares's album Songs About My Cats (2001), he features a song called "For Bertha Rand." The album features many samples of cats which are worked into Aaron's distinct break-core style of old-school jungle music.[citation needed]
Games[edit]
The Cat Lady (2012) is a psychological horror adventure game developed by Remigiusz Michalski.
In The Sims 3's "Pets" expansion pack, there is a new town called "Appaloosa Plains", and one of the many residents in the town is an elderly woman with lots of cats. The household may be somewhat challenging, as the player has to care for all those cats and fulfill the Sims' own wishes and needs as well. If the cats are not properly cared for and fed, then they may all be taken away.
Events[edit]
CatCon,[21] an event described as "The convention with cattitude", hosted seminars featuring actor Ian Somerhalder[22] and actress Mayim Bialik,[23] meet and greets with celebrity cats Lil BUB[24] and Nala,[25] and an adoption village where visitors can meet and adopt a cat or kitten.
National Cat Lady Day is celebrated 19 April, as a way to debunk the myth that cat ladies are dowdy spinsters.
See also[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cat ladies.
Think Think and Ah Tsai
Cat people and dog people
Pet humanization
References[edit]
^ a b Blakeley, Kiri (15 October 2009). "Crazy Cat Ladies". Forbes.
^ Pasulka, Nicole (23 June 2016). "'Cat Knows How to Ignore Men': A Brief History of Lesbian Cat Ladies". The Cut. New York Media. Retrieved 23 October 2018.
^ Davis, Susan; Flaherty (illus.), Jake (September 2002). "Prosecuting Animal Hoarders is like Herding Cats" (PDF). California Lawyer: 26, 28, 29, 67. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
^ Ramirez, Mark (5 August 2009). "Do you believe in the Crazy Cat Lady?". TimesUnion.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2011.
^ Gostin, Nicki (15 September 2015). "Beth Ostrosky Stern: I am a crazy cat lady... and I'm proud of it". NYDailyNews.com.
^ "It's time to smash the 'crazy cat lady' stereotype". MNN - Mother Nature Network.
^ Williams, David. "Meet the Men Proud to Be Crazy Cat Ladies". ABC News. Retrieved 12 November 2015.
^ Loakman, Jeannette. "Cat Ladies – the Documentary". Archived from the original on 25 February 2015. Retrieved 25 February 2015.
^ Cat Ladies at IMDb
^ Huso, Deborah (November 2009). "Some Live Among Hundreds of Cats". AOL Health. Archived from the original on 19 November 2009.
^ a b McAuliffe, Kathleen (6 February 2012). "How Your Cat Is Making You Crazy". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 3 June 2013.
^ Webster, Joanne P.; Kaushik, Maya; Bristow, Greg C.; McConkey, Glenn A. (1 January 2013). "Toxoplasma gondii infection, from predation to schizophrenia: Can animal behaviour help us understand human behaviour?". The Journal of Experimental Biology. 216 (1): 99–112. doi:10.1242/jeb.074716. ISSN 0022-0949. PMC 3515034. PMID 23225872.
^ Gatewood, Johanzynn (22 February 2017). "Cat ownership not linked to mental health problems, study says". CNN.
^ Solmi, F.; Hayes, J. F.; Lewis, G.; Kirkbride, J. B. (31 July 2017). "Curiosity killed the cat: No evidence of an association between cat ownership and psychotic symptoms at ages 13 and 18 years in a UK general population cohort". Psychological Medicine. 47 (9): 1659–1667. doi:10.1017/S0033291717000125. PMC 5939988. PMID 28222824.
^ Moran, D.J.; Patterson, Jennifer L. (16 June 2011). "When More Isn't Enough". Psychology Today.
^ Skloot, Rebecca (9 December 2007). "'Cat Lady' Conundrum". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017.
^ "Celebrity cat lovers". Archived from the original on 15 August 2011. Retrieved 30 March 2011.
^ Quinn, Sally; Solway, Diane (8 April 2009). "Weditor's Blog: Sally Quinn on Life in Grey Gardens". W magazine. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011.
^ From the CBC archives: Winnipeg's cat lady Bertha Rand
^ "The Queen of Queen Street". Signature Editions. Retrieved 25 February 2015.
^ "CatCon". CatConWorldwide.com. Retrieved 18 May 2015.
^ Somerhalder, Ian; Kelk, Lindsey. "Ian Somerhalder: 'If I didn't have an infant, Nikki & I would open a cat café'". Retrieved 17 May 2018.
^ "CatConLA Shows the 'Crazy Cat Lady' Stereotype Is Completely Wrong". L.A. Weekly. 8 June 2015. Retrieved 21 November 2015.
^ "The Cutest Cats and Humans We Saw at CatCon 2017". L.A. Weekly. Retrieved 17 May 2018.
^ "Cute cats, cat wine and cat-print dresses: Inside the cat lover's paradise that is CatCon 2017". Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018.
vteStock characters
List
Archetype
By ethics and moralityHeroesClassic hero
Action hero
Christ figure
Everyman
Folk hero
Knight-errant
Legacy hero
Mythological king
Paladin
Superhero
Youngest son
Antihero
Byronic hero
Man alone
Tragic hero
Other
Cyberhero
Super soldier
Space marine
RoguesLovable rogue
Gentleman detective
Jack
Trickster
Tricky slave
Zanni (servants, clowns: Harlequin, Brighella, Scapino, Pulcinella and Pierrot)
Outlaw
Bad boy
Gentleman thief
Pirate
Air pirate
Space pirate
Other
Good cop/bad cop
Rake
VillainsAntivillains
False hero
The mole
Double agent
Evil twin
Social Darwinist
Dark lord
Mad scientist
Supervillain
Monsters
Bug-eyed monster
Evil clown
Killer toy
Monster girl
Skeleton
Swamp monster
Vampires
Zombies
Nazi zombies
Other
Alazon
Archenemy
Folk devil
Igor
Masked villain
Miser
Vecchio (wealthy old men, Pantalone and Il Dottore)
Il Capitano (self styled captain, braggart)
By sex and genderFeminineLove interest
Bishōjo
Farmer's daughter
Girl next door
Hooker with a heart of gold
Ingénue
Loosu ponnu
Magical girlfriend
Catgirl
Monster girl
Manic Pixie Dream Girl
Hag
Cat lady
Crone
Fairy godmother
La Ruffiana
Loathly lady
Hawksian woman
Dragon Lady
Femme fatale
Tsundere
Woman warrior
Jungle girl
Magical girl
Queen bee
Princesse lointaine
Southern belle
Valley girl
Yamato nadeshiko
LGBT
Class S
Laotong
Lady-in-waiting
Columbina
Mammy stereotype
Geek girl
Gamer girl
Damsel in distress
Final girl
Princess and dragon
MasculineHarlequin
Pierrot
Father figure
Wise old man
Elderly martial arts master
Young
American mappillai
Himbo
Ivan the Fool
Jack
Jock
Little Johnny
Nice guy
Nice Jewish boy
Superfluous man
Prince Charming
Bishōnen
Knight-errant
Primitive
Feral child
Noble savage
Caveman
Moleman
Mountain man
LGBT
Seme and uke
Otokonoko
Bad boy
Pachuco
Black knight
Others
Adolescent cliques
Barbarian
Clown
Dragonslayer
Donor
Fool
Imaginary friend
Innamorati ("The Lovers")
Little green men
Magical Negro
Pop icon
Redshirt
Shoulder angel
Sidekick
Straight man
Tokenism
Town drunk
Tragic mulatto
Truck-kun
Village idiot
White savior