Nature's Variety
Pet food company
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for companies and organizations. Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or deleted.Find sources: "Nature's Variety" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject. It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view. Please discuss further on the talk page. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article is an orphan, as no other articles link to it. Please introduce links to this page from related articles; try the Find link tool for suggestions.
(November 2017)
(Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Nature's VarietyIndustryPet foodFounded1 December 2005 HeadquartersSt. Louis, Missouri Lincoln, NebraskaProductsDog food, cat food, grain-free pet food, raw pet foodWebsiteinstinctpetfood.com
Nature's Variety is a pet food company, wholly owned by Barcelona, Spain–based Agrolimen.[1] With manufacturing facilities in Lincoln, Nebraska, and headquarters in St. Louis, Missouri, Nature's Variety specializes in natural, raw, and grain-free foods for dogs and cats, including dry kibble and canned varieties.
Brands[edit]
Nature's Variety owns and manages the Instinct and Prairie brands.
Instinct is a full line of grain-free and gluten-free foods for dogs and cats available in a variety of forms and flavors.[2]
Prairie is a line of canned and kibble dog and cat food that utilizes meat as the first ingredient, whole grains and fruits and vegetables.
Food safety[edit]
Nature's Variety uses a food safety protocol called high pressure processing (HPP or pascalization) in its raw food. HPP is a process that kills pathogenic bacteria through high-pressure, water-based technology.
References[edit]
^ "Agrolimen acquires Nature's Variety". Petfoodindustry.com. 12 May 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2020.
^ Instinct Product Assortment
External links[edit]
Official website