List of fictional cats in film
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources.
This list of fictional cats and other felines is subsidiary to the list of fictional cats. It is restricted solely to notable feline characters from notable live action, (or primarily live action) films. For characters that appear in several separate films, only the earliest film will be recorded here.
Character
Origin
Notes
Angus Scattergood
Rock Dog
An English Persian cat
Binx
Hocus Pocus
The Sanderson Sisters (Witches Winnifred, Sarah, and Mary) turned Thackary Binx into a cat when he tried to save his sister from them at the beginning of the movie. He then plays a talking cat for most of the movie until the spell is broken at the end.[1]
Blanche
House
A little girl’s pet white Persian cat with a long bushy tail who turns out to be a demon
Butch
The Incredible Shrinking Man
Played by Orangey.
Cat
Breakfast at Tiffany's
The cat actor, Orangey, also appeared in the movies The Diary of Anne Frank and Rhubarb. Won the PATSY animal acting award in 1952 and 1962. He also guest starred in a Mission Impossible episode "The Seal" as IMF agent Rusty cat.
Cat Beast
9
A machine with the skull of a cat with the sole purpose of reactivating the Fabrication Machine from the 2009 film 9.
Church
Pet Sematary
A gray cat resurrected after being run over.
Clementine
Visit to a Small Planet
Played by Orangey and voiced by June Foray.
Cleopatra
The Comedy of Terrors
Played by Orangey.
Crookshanks
Harry Potter
A kneazle-domestic cat hybrid, belonging to Hermione Grainger. Rather large, very intelligent and fond of chasing gnomes.[2]
Cosmic Creepers
Bedknobs and Broomsticks
Miss Eglantine Price's scruffy and slightly grumpy black cat.
DC
That Darn Cat!
A wily, adventurous Siamese tomcat who lives with two young women, suburbanite sisters Ingrid and Patti Randall, whose parents are traveling abroad at the time of the story.
Duck
Constantine
Angela’s gray cat whom John Constantine uses to help cross over into hell.
Duffy
A Talking Cat!?!
The eponymous talking cat who helps the human characters with their lives. Played by Squeaky, voiced by Eric Roberts.
Fat Louie
The Princess Diaries
Mia's cat, played by four different cats - one of which belonged to the film's star, Anne Hathaway.
Filby
Primer
Aaron’s cat. When missing, called by name by Aaron and Abe during the fountain scene.[3]
Filby is most likely named as a tribute to a minor character in the science fiction novel, The Time Machine, written by H.G. Wells in 1894.[3][4]
Goose
Captain Marvel
Orange tabby.
The cat's name in the comics was Chewie
Hecate
Batman: The Movie
Appeared in the 1966 Batman movie as Catwoman's pet cat; Unknown if Hecate also appeared in 1960's Batman episode "The Purr-fect Crime/Better Luck Next time" as Catwoman's felonious feline pet (which is adopted by Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson); This episode also featured a kitten sent to Police HQ by Catwoman.
Jake
The Cat from Outer Space
A cat-like alien. His real name is Zunar-J-5/9 Doric-4-7.
Jones
Alien
Jones, or Jonesy, is a cat with orange fur who serves as mascot aboard the Nostromo. He and Ellen Ripley are the only survivors of their mission to planet LV-426. After Ripley saved Jonesy from the wreck of the Nostromo, he stays and sleeps with her when she is in hospital and, later, when she gets her own apartment. When Ripley must return to LV-426, she fondly curses him and says, "You're staying here".
Keanu
Keanu
Tabby kitten.
Kitty Galore
Cats & Dogs: The Revenge of Kitty Galore
Former M.E.O.W.S. agent Ivana Clawyu
Mrs. Norris
Harry Potter
A
‘scrawny, dust-coloured creature with bulging, lamp-like eyes’.[5] Devoted pet/accomplice of Hogwarts caretaker Argus Filch.[6]
Mr. Bigglesworth
Austin Powers
A parody of Blofeld's cat from James Bond films.
Mr. Tinkles
Cats & DogsCats & Dogs: The Revenge of Kitty Galore
An evil snow-white cat planning to sabotage the efforts of Professor Brody to discover a cure for human allergies to dogs.
Mr. Jinx
Meet the Parents
Played by two five-year-old Himalayan cats named Bailey and Misha. The American Humane Association oversaw the filming of all scenes where the cats were used and ensured the animals' obedience and well-being by keeping two trainers and a veterinarian on set at all times.
Milo
The Adventures of Milo and Otis
Ginger kitten
Morris the Cat
The Long Goodbye and Shamus
Advertising cat best known as finicky cat Morris of 9 Lives cat food
Mouschi
The Diary of Anne Frank
Played by Orangey.
Napoleon
Mrs. Miniver
The Miniver family's cat
Neutron
This Island Earth
Played by Orangey.
Cat
Breakfast at Tiffany's
The cat actor, Orangey, also appeared in the movies The Diary of Anne Frank and Rhubarb. Won the PATSY animal acting award in 1952 and 1962. He also guest starred in a Mission Impossible episode "The Seal" as IMF agent Rusty cat.
Orion
Men in Black (1997 film)
Orange and white cat who carries an entire galaxy in his collar (referred to as Orion's belt)
Pyewacket
Bell, Book and Candle
Siamese cat and familiar of Gillian Holroyd (Kim Novak), who is a witch
Rhubarb
Rhubarb
Played by 14 different cats, including Orangey.
Sassy
Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey
A Himalayan voiced by Sally Field.
The film was a remake of The Incredible Journey which featured a Siamese cat and named Tao.
Snowbell
Stuart Little
The pet Persian cat voiced by Nathan Lane later Kevin Schon white cat of the Little family who gradually warms up to Stuart voiced by Michael J Fox.
Smarf
Too Many Cooks
An anthropomorphic cat puppet used in the short, a parody of various other puppets used in sitcoms.
Spot
Star Trek Generations
Data's cat seen in Star Trek: The Next Generation[7] and Star Trek Generations
Stray cat
The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo
Tabby cat who arrives at the Swedish dwelling of Mikael Blomkvist.
The male cat (who is not specifically given a name by the characters) is seen several times during the film, sitting by himself on a chair, table or bed, in typical feline behaviour. However, the cat becomes a victim of revenge, and is last seen dismembered and left in front of the door as a warning.
Sweetie
The Fifth Element
A white cat who lives with Korben Dallas in his apartment in New York City.[8]
Tad Lazenby
Cats & Dogs: The Revenge of Kitty Galore
Black bowtie wearing Tuxedo cat head of "M.E.O.W.S." Homage to James Bond 007; voiced by Roger Moore; his name is a spoof of George Lazenby
Thomasina
The Three Lives of Thomasina
A cat who is reincarnated twice after death and grows closer to Lori and Mr. McDhui.
Tonto
Harry and Tonto
Turkish Angora Cat
James Bond films, 1962–present
Sidekick pet of Ernst Stavro Blofeld; appeared in movies Dr. No, From Russia with Love, Thunderball {and its 1983 remake Never Say Never Again}; You Only Live Twice; On Her Majesty's Secret Service, and Diamonds Are Forever. In For Your Eyes Only, appeared as trademark sidekick of unnamed villain implied to be Blofeld. A similar cat appears in Spectre where Bond is tortured. Spoofed in Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery and its sequels, as Dr. Evil's pet Mr. Bigglesworth and Mini Me's pet Mini Mr. Bigglesworth; in a Powerpuff Girls cartoon, as Mr. Tinkles; and in movies Cats & Dogs and Cats & Dogs: The Revenge of Kitty Galore
Ulysses
Inside Llewyn Davis
Orange tabby.
unnamed
And Then There Were None
American shorthair appears throughout the film, taking its customary position on the lap of the villain, Judge Francis J. Quincanon, played by Barry Fitzgerald, shortly before the Judge dies in the penultimate scene of the movie
See also[edit]
List of fictional felines
List of fictional big cats
References[edit]
^ "Thackery Binx (Character) - Biography". www.imdb.com. Archived from the original on 2012-08-05.
^ "Crookshanks - Pottermore".
^ a b Tim S (5 May 2009). "The Primer Universe: The Time Machine". The Primer Universe. Retrieved 9 July 2015.
^ "Free Study Guide for The Time Machine by H. G. Wells-Book Summary (Characters)". Retrieved 11 August 2016.
^ "Influential cats of the wizarding world - Pottermore".
^ "Mrs Norris - Pottermore".
^ Fiona Kelleghan (2005), "Cats", The Greenwood encyclopedia of science fiction and fantasy, vol. 1, pp. 105–107, ISBN 978-0-313-32951-7
^ "The Fifth Element (1997)". Cinema Cats. Retrieved 2 December 2017.
vteLists of fictional life formsPlants
Plants
Animals
Arthropods
Fish
Parasites
Worms
Amphibians
Frogs and toads
animation
Reptiles
Crocodilians
Dinosaurs
Snakes
Turtles
Birds
Birds of prey
Ducks
animation
Penguins
MammalsCanines
Animation
Comics
Literature
Dogs
prose and poetry
comics
live-action film
live-action television
animation
animated film
animated television
video games
Foxes
Wolves
Felines
Animation
Comics
Film
Literature
Television
Big cats
animation
Rodents
Animation
Comics
Literature
Video Games
Non-human primates
Animation
Comics
Film
Literature
Television
Ungulates
Animation
Horses
Literature
Pachyderms
Pigs
Miscellaneous
Bears
Marsupials
Musteloids
animation
Badgers
Raccoons
Pinnipeds
Rabbits and hares
Rhinogradentia
HumanoidsGeneral
Comics
Film
Literature
Television
Video games
Specific
Avian
Piscine and Amphibian
Reptilian
OtherAlien species
Humanoids
Parasites
Symbionts
Legendary
By type
Dragons
popular culture
film and television
games
literature
mythology and folklore
Equines
Unicorns
Winged horses
Winged unicorns
Ghosts
Giants
Hybrids
Mermaids
Vampires
by region
Dhampirs
Werewolves
Theological
Fictional angels
Fictional demons
Fictional deities