Liliger
Hybrid carnivore
Liliger
Male liliger
Female liliger
Scientific classification
Domain:
Eukaryota
Kingdom:
Animalia
Phylum:
Chordata
Class:
Mammalia
Order:
Carnivora
Suborder:
Feliformia
Family:
Felidae
Subfamily:
Pantherinae
Genus:
Panthera
Species:
P. leo♂
× P. leo × P. tigris♀
The liliger is the hybrid offspring of a male lion (Panthera leo) and a female liger (Panthera leo♂ × Panthera tigris♀). Thus, it is a second generation hybrid. In accordance with Haldane's rule, male tigons and ligers are sterile, but female ligers and tigons can produce cubs. The first such hybrid was born in 1943, at the Hellabrunn Zoo.
Description[edit]
Male liligers are slightly larger than the females, and also sport a mane, a characteristic they share with male lions. While ligers often inherit the sandy coloring and stripes of its parentage, liligers often develop rosettes similar to a leopard.
History[edit]
According to Wild Cats of the World (1975) by C. A. W. Guggisberg, ligers and tigons were long thought to be sterile, but in 1943, a 15-year-old hybrid between a lion and an 'Island' tiger was successfully mated with a lion at the Munich Hellabrunn Zoo. The female cub, though of delicate health, was raised to adulthood.
In September 2012, the Russian Novosibirsk Zoo announced the birth of a liliger. The cub was named Kiara, and was born to an 8-year-old female liger, Zita and a male African lion, Sam. On May 16, 2013, the same couple produced three more female liligers: Luna, Sandra, and Eva.[1][2][3][4]
A liliger was born in the United States from a lion named Simba and a ligress named Akaria at 6:18 AM on November 29, 2013, at The Garold Wayne Interactive Zoological Foundation in Oklahoma.[5][6] At approximately 3:00 AM on November 30, 2013, the ligress gave birth to two more cubs.[7][failed verification]
Craig Packer, director of the Lion Research Center at the University of Minnesota has said "In terms of conservation, it's so far away from anything, it's kind of pointless to even say it's irrelevant". The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA), the organization responsible for accrediting zoos in North America, neither approves of nor breeds the animals, because they focus on the conservation of wildlife and programs serving that purpose.[8]
See also[edit]
Litigon
References[edit]
^ The Moscow Times. "Rare 'Liliger' Born to Lion, Liger Couple". Retrieved 11 September 2012.
^ BBC News. "Siberian zoo breeds the world's first Liliger". BBC News. Retrieved 18 September 2012.
^ Уникальное пополнение коллекции Новосибирского зоопарка [A unique complement to the collection of the Novosibirsk Zoo] (in Russian). Novosibirsk Zoo. September 10, 2012. Archived from the original on September 28, 2012..
^ Лигрица Зита во второй раз стала мамой [Ligritsa Zita for the second time became a mother] (in Russian). Novosibirsk Zoo. 16 June 2013. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013.
^ "Everything You Need to Know About the Liliger: Part Lion, Part Tiger and Very Controversial in the Big Cat World". E! Online. December 27, 2013. Retrieved 2021-02-03.
^ Griffin, David. "Wynnewood Exotic Animal Park Breeds Nation's First 'Liligers'". www.news9.com. Retrieved 2021-02-03.
^ "How Russian liger gave birth to four liligers". Russia Beyond the Headlines. 22 July 2013.
^ ""Liliger" Born in Russia No Boon for Big Cats". National Geographic. 21 September 2012. Archived from the original on September 24, 2012.
vteMammal hybrids
Kingdom Animalia
Phylum Chordata
Class Mammalia
Bovidae
Bovid hybrid
American Breed
Beefalo
Dwarf Lulu
Dzo
Sheep–goat hybrid
Yakalo
Żubroń
Camelidae
Cama
Bukht
Huarizo
Canidae
Canid hybrid
Coydog
Coywolf
Dingo–dog hybrid
Dogxim
Eastern coyote
Jackal–dog hybrid
Sulimov dog
Wolfdog
Cetacea
Clymene dolphin
Wholphin
Narluga
Elephantidae
Elephant hybrid
Equus
Equid hybrid
Hinny
Kunga
Lord Morton's mare
Mule
Zebroid
Felidae
Felid hybrid
Bengal cat
Blynx
Caraval
Chausie
Kellas cat
Pumapard
Savannah cat
Panthera hybrid
Liger
Liliger
Marozi
Congolese spotted lion
Tigon
Hominidae
Denisova 11
Humanzee
Hybrid orangutan
Koolakamba
Macropodinae
Macropod hybrids
Sus
Iron Age pig
Mustela
Polecat–ferret hybrid
Polecat–mink hybrid
Ursus
Ursid hybrid
ABC Islands bear
Grizzly–black bear hybrid
Grizzly–polar bear hybrid
This felid-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte