Library cat
Domestic cats that live in public libraries
"Israel", at Gulbenkian Library, The Armenian Quarter of Jerusalem
Library cats are domesticated cats that live in public libraries worldwide. The association of cats with libraries continued from the Middle Ages up to the present day.
Contemporary library cats have also been featured in film and literature.
History[edit]
The relationship between cats and libraries is centuries old.[1][2][3] Monastic records from the Middle Ages indicate cats were kept in medieval monasteries in order to control rats that might otherwise eat valuable manuscripts.[4]
Modern examples[edit]
In 1745, Russian Empress Elisabeth published an order to transport cats to her court. The descendants of these cats now live in the State Hermitage museum.[5] During the nineteenth century, the British government compensated those libraries that housed cats, on the understanding that they kept rodents away from books.[4]
Library cats have appeared as characters in books and movies,[6] are immortalized in stone in front of their institutions,[4] and some are given positions on the institution's board. Many cats enjoy high-profile professional roles of marketing and public relations.[6]
The relationship between libraries and cats is at times contentious. In one case, there were attempts to remove a cat from a library, based upon concerns of patrons with allergies claiming violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act.[7] Another considered removal was because of the library cat's reaction to service animals.[1] When a library cat was removed from its institution in Putnam Valley, New York, the institution suffered financially. Two members of the community were so upset about the removal that they deleted bequests to the library from their wills, producing an $80,000 loss in potential revenue.[1]
The Library Cat Society, a now defunct organization, was established in 1987 to encourage the establishment, respect, and recognition of library cats. The society included dozens of member libraries that exchanged information about their cats, and published a newsletter about them.[6]
The anthology Cats, Librarians, and Libraries: Essays for and About the Library Cat Society explored this relationship. The lives of library cats were studied by Gary Roma, a documentarian who produced a film entitled Puss in Books: Adventures of the Library Cat.[6] According to Roma's website, there are more than 800 cataloged library cats worldwide. The catalog indicates that many of them have since died.
Additionally, cats are often found in independent bookstores throughout the United States.[8][9][10]
Benefits[edit]
Library cats have been used to befriend patrons, boost librarian morale, and inspire reading and literacy programs.[6] Cats can also be useful for marketing campaigns, and are frequently used to generate publicity for their libraries, particularly on social media.[11] The presence of a cat can create a relaxed environment and ease daily stress for patrons and librarians alike,[12][13] but usually without the typically disruptive loud noises other animals (e.g., dogs) may produce. Cats' generally independent nature may also suit the intellectual environment of a library, as they are low-maintenance and may more readily suit the otherwise preoccupied intellectual personalities who frequent libraries.[14]
Famous examples[edit]
Dewey Readmore Books is perhaps the most famous library cat. He lived in Iowa's Spencer Public Library for 19 years. After his death, a book was published about him,[15] and later a number of follow-up books.
White Settlement City Council voted to remove library cat Browser from White Settlement Public Library in 2016, but reversed their decision after an international backlash.[16]
Scottish Fold cats Baker and Taylor solved a Nevada libraries rodent invasion while charming community patrons. Their quirky habits like sleeping in office supply boxes and dragging shoelaces across rows of books landed them the role of official mascots for the book distributing brand they were named after. [17]
See also[edit]
Cats portal
Animal-assisted therapy
Anthrozoology
Bodega cat
Ship's cat
References[edit]
^ a b c Noriyuki, Duane (18 February 2002). "In the Wonderland of Libraries Are Cats Like Alis". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 20 June 2013.
^ "The scholar and his cat, Pangur Bán". www.ling.upenn.edu. Retrieved 2022-04-17.
^ "Cats, get off the page! - Medieval manuscripts blog". blogs.bl.uk. Retrieved 2019-07-18.
^ a b c Kagamaster, Allie. "History of Library Cats". Cat Fancy. BowTie, Inc. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 20 June 2013.
^ McGrane, Sally (2012-09-25). "Russia's Museum Cats". The New Yorker. Retrieved 2021-02-22.
^ a b c d e "Wesleyan's Library Cats". Wesleyan College. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2013.
^ Kelley, Michael (17 May 2013). "Send Me Your Library Cats". Library Journal. 05. Retrieved 20 June 2013.
^ Korbelik, Jeff (13 November 2012). "What is a cat?". Lincoln Journal Star. Retrieved 8 August 2013.
^ Davies, Richard. "A Catalog of Bookstore Cats". AbeBooks. Retrieved 8 August 2013.
^ "KittyWanKenobi | Sandman Books". www.sandmanbooks.com. Retrieved 2021-08-12.
^ Kroski, E. (2014). "A quick guide to library cats". Open Education Database (OEDb). Retrieved 29 March 2015.
^ Mieszkowski, Katharine (12 February 2009). "The love that dare not bark its name". Salon. Retrieved 7 July 2013.
^ Black, George. "Made for Each Other". On Earth. Archived from the original on 16 September 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2013.
^ Roach, John (29 July 2010). "How science measures up cats and dogs". NBC News. Retrieved 7 July 2013.
^ Rich, Motoko (4 April 2007). "Iowa Library's Cat Has a Rich Second Life as a Biography". The New York Times. Retrieved 20 June 2013.
^ Harris, Ricki (5 July 2016). "Beloved Cat Will Keep His Job at the Local Library After International Backlash". ABC News. Retrieved 2023-01-02.
^ "Meet the library cats who 'read' their way into America's hearts". TODAY.com. 2016-04-27. Retrieved 2023-10-25.
Further reading[edit]
Pacini, Daniela (Summer 2009). "Breaking Down Barriers: Dogs and Cats in Public Libraries". Faculty of Information Quarterly (University of Toronto) 1 (3). ISSN 1925-9107.
Stevens, Norman D. (2004). "Myeo: the First Library Cat" (satirical). Molesworth Institute. (University of Connecticut). Paper 48.
External links[edit]
Library resources about
Library cats
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Purr 'n' Fur | Featuring Felines: Library Cats
Gary Roma – Puss in Books: Adventures of the Library Cat
Library Cats – American Library Association on Pinterest
vteDomestic catsFelinology
Anatomy
Genetics
Dwarf cat
Kitten
Odd-eyed cat
Squitten
Coat genetics
Bicolor cat
Black cat
Calico cat
Tabby cat
Tortoiseshell cat
Health
Aging
Declawing
Diet
dental health
senior
Vaccination
Behavior
Cat–dog relationship
Catfight
Catnip
valerian
Communication
Meow
Purr
Kneading
Intelligence
Play and toys
Righting reflex
Senses
Human–catinteraction
Ailurophobia
Cat cafés
Cat killers
Cat massage
Cat meat
Cat-scratch disease
Cat show
Cats in ancient Egypt
Cultural depictions
fictional
Internet
Feral cat
Cats and Islam
Lolcat
National Cat Day
Pet cat
Puppy cat
Working cat
Bodega cat
Farm cat
Library cat
Ship's cat
Zoonosis
Registries
American Cat Fanciers Association
Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana
Canadian Cat Association
Cat Aficionado Association
Cat Fanciers' Association
Fédération Internationale Féline
Governing Council of the Cat Fancy
New Zealand Cat Fancy
Southern Africa Cat Council
The International Cat Association
World Cat Congress
World Cat Federation
Breeds(full list)(experimental)Fullydomestic
Abyssinian
American Curl
American Shorthair
Balinese
Brazilian Shorthair
British Shorthair
Birman
Bombay
Burmese
Burmilla
California Spangled
Chartreux
Chinese Li Hua
Colorpoint Shorthair
Cornish Rex
Cymric
Devon Rex
Donskoy
Egyptian Mau
European Shorthair
Exotic Shorthair
German Rex
Himalayan
Japanese Bobtail
Javanese
Khao Manee
Korat
Kurilian Bobtail
Lykoi
Maine Coon
Manx
Munchkin
Neva Masquerade
Norwegian Forest
Ocicat
Ojos Azules
Oriental Shorthair
Persian
Peterbald
Pixie-bob
Ragdoll
Ragamuffin
Russian Blue
Scottish Fold
Selkirk Rex
Siamese
Siberian
Singapura
Snowshoe
Somali
Sphynx
Thai
Traditional Persian
Tonkinese
Toyger
Turkish Angora
Turkish Van
Hybrid
Bengal
Chausie
Highlander
Savannah
Serengeti
Landraces
Aegean
Cyprus
Domestic long-haired
Domestic short-haired
Kellas
Sokoke
Van
Diseases anddisorders
Acne
Asthma
Calicivirus
Congenital sensorineural deafness
Feline corneal sequestrum
Flea
Coccidia
Heartworm
Hepatic lipidosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Immunodeficiency virus
Infectious peritonitis
Leukemia virus
Lower urinary tract disease
Panleukopenia
Giardiasis
Polydactyly
Rabies
Ringworm
Tritrichomonas foetus
Roundworm
Skin disorders
Tick
Toxoplasmosis
Viral rhinotracheitis
Cats by country
Australia
Canada
Japan
New Zealand
United Kingdom
United States
Related
List of individual cats
List of oldest cats
Cats in folklore
Category
Authority control databases: National
Israel
United States