Moscow Cat Museum
Art museum in Moscow, RussiaMoscow Cat MuseumМОСКОВСКИЙ МУЗЕЙ КОШКИEstablishedMarch 1993 (1993-03)LocationRublyovka, Moscow, RussiaCoordinates55°45′21″N 37°37′02″E﻿ / ﻿55.755826°N 37.6173°E﻿ / 55.755826; 37.6173TypeArt museumCollection size1,500FounderAndrei AbramovWebsitemoscow-cat-museum.wixsite.com
Moscow Cat Museum is a museum in Moscow, created in 1993 and dedicated entirely to the theme of cats in art and life.
History[edit]
Between May and June 1992, exhibitions organised by Andrei Abramov were held around Moscow, with painters, sculptors, and other artists, with a focus on the feline form.[1] The exhibition program was titled 'Cat's Eye', and this would be a running title for special exhibits at the museum.[2] The program was so successful that it led Andrei creating the Moscow Cat Museum in Moscow, Central Federal District in March 1993. As well as art ranging from batiks to photographs, the museum also includes books, toys, and suits, all centered on the theme of cats.[3][4] The museum later had to be moved to Rublyovskoye Shosse as the initial sponsors, a pet food company, withdrew their funding.[1]
Exhibitions[edit]
The list of main expositions includes Cat's Eye, Women and Cats, Cat's Magic, Children's Pictures of Cats, Cat Around the Map projects. Though the museum contains trinkets such as biscuits and postcards, none of what is displayed is on sale.[1]
The museum is host to the annual 'Woman and Cat' beauty contest. Hosted as part of a wider festival, its main judging criterion is stated as judging "the gracefulness and harmony of the pair, woman and cat".[3] However, extra points are awarded for cat knowledge, and a special challenge is issued for contestants.[1]
References[edit]
^ a b c d O'Flynn, Kevin (September 3, 1999). "Weird Moscow". The Moscow Times.
^ "Take The Kids". The Moscow Times. February 25, 1999.
^ a b "Moscow Cat Museum". Baysider.com. Retrieved December 22, 2014.
^ "Moscow Museums". Budget Moscow. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2014.
External links[edit]
Official website
vteCat-themed museums and galleries for cultural depictions of cats
Garros Galería
Kuching Cat Museum
KattenKabinet
Moscow Cat Museum
vteMuseums and galleries in MoscowGeneral museums
ART4.RU Contemporary Art Museum
Bakhrushin Museum
Bulgakov Museum in Moscow
Diamond Fund
Fersman Mineralogical Museum
Galeyev Gallery
Gulag Museum
Institute of Russian Realist Art
Ivan the Great Bell Tower
Jewish Museum and Tolerance Center
Kuskovo
The Lumiere Brothers Center for Photography
The Lumiere Brothers Gallery
Moscow Cat Museum
Moscow Design Museum
Moscow House of Photography
Moscow Museum of Modern Art
Multimedia Art Museum, Moscow
Museum of Calligraphy
Moscow Paleontological Museum
Museum of Moscow
Museum of the Moscow Railway
National Centre for Contemporary Arts
Ostankino Palace
Poklonnaya Hill
Polytechnic Museum
Pushkin Museum
RKK Energiya museum
Rumyantsev Museum
Russian State Library
Ryabushinsky Museum of Icons and Paintings
Shchusev Museum of Architecture
State Historical Museum
Tretyakov Gallery
Tsaritsyno Palace
Vernadsky State Geological Museum
Vlakhernskoye-Kuzminki
Zoological Museum of Moscow University
Religious museums
Cathedral of the Annunciation
Church of the Deposition of the Robe
Church of the Twelve Apostles
War and space museums
Central Armed Forces Museum
Kremlin Armoury
Kremlin Arsenal
Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics
Museum of the Great Patriotic War, Moscow
Tagansky Protected Command Point