Splintercat
Mythical creature from American folklore
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The splintercat is a legendary fearsome critter in the folklore of the United States.
The splintercat is a nocturnal feline of great ferocity. It flies through the air with terrific speed and when it hits a large tree, it knocks the branches off, withers the trunk, and leaves it standing like a silvery ghost. These dead snags can be seen in many parts of the Pacific Northwest.[1] The splinter cat performs this feat that it is named after to expose raccoons and bees.[2] However, the act of breaking open trees with its head leaves it with a constant headache, which causes it always to be in a foul mood. Accordingly, one is advised to never approach a splintercat.
Splintercat Creek, found in the northern Cascade Range of Oregon, is named after this legendary animal.
The splintercat appears in the 1974 children's book The Last of the Really Great Whangdoodles by Julie Andrews Edwards. This particular splintercat answers to the Prime Minister of Whangdoodland and also enjoys playing cat's cradle.
An alternate version of the splintercat legend comes from Nova Scotia. In this version they come out at night in winter. If you spend time in the woods during the winter you can hear the trees crack from frost expanding. In a quiet wood, this sound is eerie and loud and is said to be a splinter cat emerging from a tree after a long summer hibernation.
They are described as having exceptionally long claws and powerful legs. Their fur is patterned and colored similar to the bark of their favourite tree.
They are perfectly still and leap on their prey from the shadows.
References[edit]
^ Kloster, Tom. "Story of the Splintercat". Welcome to Splintercat!. Retrieved 27 November 2023.
^ Blege, Theodore Christian (December 2004). Minnesota: A History of the State (2nd ed.). University of Minnesota Press. p. 335. ISBN 978-0816639830.
Sources[edit]
Blegen, Theodore C. (1963). Minnesota, a history of the state. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. LC 63013124.
Botkin, Benjamin Albert (1998). The American people : stories, legends, tales, traditions, and songs. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 1-56000-984-5.
Cox, William Thomas (1984). Fearsome creatures of the lumberwoods : with a few desert and mountain beasts. Sacramento: Bishop Publishing. LC 85111981.
Edwards, Julie Andrews (1974). The Last of the Really Great Whangdoodles. New York: Harper and Row. ISBN 0-06-021805-3.
Rose, Carol (2000). Giants, monsters, and dragons : an encyclopedia of folklore, legend, and myth. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 0-87436-988-6.
"National Wildlife and Conservation Digest: Covering the North American Continent"
vteAmerican folkloreNative
Alaska
Salishan
Folk heroes
Johnny Appleseed
Elfego Baca
Daniel Boone
Br'er Rabbit
Jim Bridger
Paul Bunyan
Davy Crockett
Mike Fink
Geronimo
John Henry
Calamity Jane
Casey Jones
Molly Pitcher
Theodore Roosevelt
Ola Värmlänning
Idiomatic figures
Average Joe
Cooter Brown
Jack Robinson
Sam Hide
Uncle Sam
Fearsome critters
Agropelter
Axehandle hound
Ball-tailed cat
Belled buzzard
Cactus cat
Dungavenhooter
Fur-bearing trout
Gillygaloo
Glawackus
Goofus bird
Gumberoo
Hidebehind
Hodag
Hoop snake
Hugag
Jackalope
Jersey Devil
Joint snake
Sidehill gouger
Snallygaster
Snipe
Snow snake
Splintercat
Squonk
Teakettler
Wampus cat
Ghosts
Bell Witch
Ghosts of the American Civil War
Lincoln's ghost
La Llorona
Red Ghost
White Lady
Legends
Bloodstopping
Campfire story
Confederate gold
Fountain of Youth
Goatman (urban legend)
Lost Dutchman's Gold Mine
Lost Ship of the Desert
Madstone
Mercy Brown vampire incident
Mothman
Seven Cities of Gold
Tailypo
Westerns
Cowboys/Vaqueros
African
Flying Africans
Uncle Remus
Literary folk heroes
Alfred Bulltop Stormalong
Annie Christmas
Brother Jonathan
Casey at the Bat
Cordwood Pete
Evangeline
Febold Feboldson
Ichabod Crane
Joe Magarac
Johnny Kaw
Kemp Morgan
Mose Humphrey
Ole Pete
Pecos Bill
Rip Van Winkle
Tony Beaver
Windwagon Smith
This mythology-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte