Pedigree Petfoods
Mars, Incorporated petfood subsidiary
The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United Kingdom and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Pedigree PetfoodsIndustryAnimal food manufacturingFounded1957; 67 years ago (1957) (as Chappy)Leicestershire, England, U.K.HeadquartersMcLean, Virginia, U.S.Number of employees1,200 (estimated)ParentMars, IncorporatedWebsitewww.pedigree.com
Pedigree Petfoods is a subsidiary of the American group Mars, Incorporated specializing in pet food, with factories in England at Melton Mowbray and Birstall, Leeds; and offices at McLean, Virginia.
History[edit]
In 1934, Mars Limited, a division of the large American confectionery company, that had been based in Slough since 1932, acquired Chappel Brothers in Manchester. This company took low-quality meat and canned it as dog food, branded as "Chappie".[1]
New dog food brands Pal and Lassie were introduced during the 1950s.[2]
Mars Inc.[edit]
In 1968, Mars took over Kal Kan Foods of Los Angeles.[3]
In 1988, Kal Kan Foods changed the name of its dog food to Pedigree, the name Mars used to sell dog food outside the United States. The next year, Mars applied their worldwide branding of Whiskas to their cat food branding.[4]
In 1998, Kal Kan was the top-selling dog food brand but was going downhill. In the United States, its Pedigree Select brand became Cesar, used in Europe and Asia.[5]
The Pedigree Foundation[edit]
In the United States, The Pedigree Foundation is a philanthropic organization dedicated to helping shelter dogs find permanent homes.[6] The foundation, created in 2008, provides grants to 501(c)(3) dog shelters and breed rescue organizations, and help dog lovers adopt, volunteer, and make donations.[7] According to the foundation's FAQ site, it has raised more than $4 million to date.[8] In 2008, it distributed more than $1.1 million in grant money to more than 500 shelters and breed rescues. Use of awarded grant money by qualified recipients is virtually unrestricted, but is most often used for shelter improvements or veterinary care.[9]
See also[edit]
Whiskas
Mars, Incorporated
References[edit]
^ Hudson, Kenneth: Industrial history from the air, Cambridge University Press 1984
^ Mars Petcare Archived 2017-10-05 at the Wayback Machine Mars United Kingdom (retrieved 17 Oct 2011)
^ "Our History". Mars, Incorporated. Retrieved April 17, 2019.
^ Lazarus, George (August 12, 1988). "Kal Kan Getting a New Pedigree". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved April 17, 2019.
^ Pollack, Judann (June 15, 1998). "Mars' Kal-Kan Rebranding Pedigree Select As Cesar: Marketer Brings Name from Asia, Europe to U.S." Advertising Age. Retrieved April 17, 2019.
^ "Pedigree Feeding Project provides dog food to shelters". Petfood Industry. Retrieved 22 June 2023.
^ "Pedigree Foundation".
^ "Pedigree Foundation FAQ".
^ "Pedigree Foundation 2008 Annual Report" (PDF).
External links[edit]
Pedigree Petfoods UK
Mars UK
Pedigree main site
Pedigree India
vteMars Inc.Mars family
Franklin Clarence Mars
Ethel V. Mars
Forrest Mars Sr.
Forrest Mars Jr.
John Franklyn Mars
Jacqueline Mars
Victoria B. Mars
Stephen M. Badger
BrandsChocolate
3 Musketeers
A. Korkunov
Balisto
Bounty
Celebrations
Dove
Ethel M
Flyte
Galaxy
Minstrels
Kudos
M-Azing
M&M's
Maltesers
Mars
Milky Way
Revels
Snickers
Topic
Tracker
Treets
Twix
Other foods
Combos
Dolmio
Munch
Promite
Seeds of Change
Ben's Original
Kind
Drink
CocoaVia
Flavia
Wrigley gumWith sugar
Alert
Big League Chew
Big Red
Bubble Tape
Doublemint
Hubba Bubba
Juicy Fruit
Wrigley's Spearmint
Winterfresh
Sugar free
5
Airwaves
Eclipse Ice
Excel
Extra
Freedent
Orbit
Ouch!
Surpass
Mint and candy
Altoids
Eclipse
Life Savers
Lockets
Pacers
Skittles
Starburst
Tunes
Pet careProducts
Eukanuba (except in Europe)
Iams (except in Europe)
Nutro
Pedigree
Royal Canin
Sheba
Whiskas
Services
Anicura
Banfield Pet Hospital
BluePearl Specialty and Emergency Pet Hospital
PrettyLitter
VCA Animal Hospitals
Whistle
Category
List of assets owned by Mars, Incorporated
Authority control databases International
VIAF
National
United States