Kingdom of Cat
Kingdom
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Kingdom of Cat" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This map of Scotland shows roughly where the Pictish kingdoms were located, superimposed on a (simplified) map of the traditional counties of Scotland.
Cait or Cat was a Pictish kingdom originating c. AD 800[1] during the Early Middle Ages. It was centered in what is now Caithness in northern Scotland. It was, according to Pictish legend, founded by Caitt (or Cat), one of the seven sons of the ancestor figure Cruithne. The territory of Cait covered not only modern Caithness, but also southeast Sutherland.[2]
The place name Caithness derives from Cait, which is also preserved in the Gaelic name for Sutherland (Cataibh), in several specific names within that county and in the earliest recorded name for Shetland (Inse Catt, meaning "islands of the Cat people").[3]
Watson (1994) compared this usage with the early Irish Innse Orc (islands of the boars) for Orkney and concluded that these are tribal names based on animals.[3]
History[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.
(January 2022)
See also[edit]
Fortriu
Kingdom of Ce
Scotland in the Early Middle Ages
References[edit]
^ Chadwick, Hector Munro (1949). Early Scotland: The Picts the Scots & the Welsh of Southern Scotland. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 81. Retrieved 4 July 2017.
^ "The Making of the Kingdom of Fortriu". Rampant Scotland. Retrieved 4 July 2017.
^ a b Watson, William J. (1994) [1926]. The Celtic Place-Names of Scotland. Edinburgh: Birlinn. pp. 29–30. ISBN 1-84158-323-5.
vteScotland in the Middle AgesEras
Sub-Roman
Early Middle Ages
High Middle Ages
Late Middle Ages
Early Realms
Alba
Bamburgh
Bernicia
Cat
Cé
Dál Riata
Fortriu
Galloway
Gododdin
Isles
Moray
Orkney
Rhinns
Scotland
Strathclyde
Topics
Architecture
Art
Childhood
Demography
Economy
Agriculture
Trade
Education
Geography
Government
Identity
Language
Literature
Music
Religion
Society
Warfare
Women
Events
Christianisation
Davidian Revolution
Great Cause
Wars of Independence
First
Second
Renaissance
Places
Lordship of the Isles
Marches
The Old North
Scandinavian Scotland
Institutions
Court
Law
Parliament
Privy Council
Related articles
History of the British Isles
This article related to the history of the United Kingdom or its predecessor states is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte