Black cat bone
Lucky charm used in the magical tradition of African-American hoodoo
A black cat bone is a type of lucky charm used in the magical tradition of hoodoo. It is thought to ensure a variety of positive effects, such as invisibility, good luck, protection from malevolent magic, rebirth after death, and romantic success.[1]
...Got a black cat bonegot a mojo too,I got John the Conqueror root,I'm gonna mess with you...
—"Hoochie Coochie Man," Muddy Waters
The bone, anointed with Van Van oil, may be carried as a component of a mojo bag; alternatively, without the coating of oil, it is held in the charm-user's mouth.[2]
Origins[edit]
The black cat has been a symbol of both good and ill luck in near-worldwide folklore accounts. Magical traditions involving black cat bones, specifically, have been found in German-Canadian practice as well as in hoodoo; these German-Canadian magic-makers were not previously in contact with hoodooists, suggesting a European origin to the charm.[2]
The use of the black cat bone to ensure invisibility, specifically as an aid to people, is comparable to the European Hand of Glory.[3]
Differences in method[edit]
After a black cat is caught, it is almost universally boiled alive in a pot of water at midnight, so that its bones may be more easily looked over by the practitioner. One particular bone, special to each individual cat, contains all the magical efficacy alone. This part of the ritual comes from the European magical text, the Book of Saint Cyprian.[4]
A variety of rituals and methods are used to determine which bone is the right one, and preparation before the cat's slaughter can vary according to tradition.
One method of obtaining a black cat bone, described in Zora Neale Hurston's Mules and Men, involves a period of fasting before the actual catching of the animal. After the standard boiling of the cat's corpse, each bone is tasted by the hoodooist, who then selects the first bitter-tasting bone as the correct one.[5]
Another way to determine the magical bone, though it is otherwise similar in procedure, involves a mirror. When the reflection of the bone becomes dark, the hoodoo practitioner will know that it is the right one. A variation of this method is also practiced on the Sea Islands, where the one bone that does not reflect in the mirror is believed to be magical.[2]
Yet another method of determining which bone is the correct one is to dump all the bones into a river. The bone that floats upstream is to be considered the bone of choice.
Sale of purported "black cat bones"[edit]
Contemporary hoodoo supply shops sell items labeled "black cat bones", usually small bones taken from a chicken and dyed black.[3] Contemporary hoodoo, Wiccan, and other metaphysical supply shops use black cat fur for black cat magic, instead of bones.[4]
References[edit]
^ Anderson, Jeffrey E. (December 2005). Conjure In African American Society. Louisiana State University Press. ISBN 0-8071-3092-3.
^ a b c Newbell Niles PH. D. Puckett (January 2003). Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro. Kessinger Publishing, LLC. ISBN 0-7661-2778-8.
^ a b Long, Carolyn Morrow (April 2001). Spiritual Merchants: Religion, Magic, and Commerce. The University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 1-57233-110-0.
^ a b Catherine Yronwode. "Black Cat Spiritual Supplies". Retrieved August 25, 2018.
^ Hurston, Zora Neale (January 1990). Mules and Men. Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-06-091648-6.
vteHoodoo traditionMagic and concepts
Black cat bone
Boo Hag
Goofer dust
Haint blue
Hot foot powder
Kalunga line
Kongo cosmogram
Mojo
Rabbit's foot
Ring shout
Simbi
Folklore
African American folktales
John the Conqueror
Moses, Man of the Mountain
Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses
Sukey and The Mermaid
Practices
Ring shout
Gullah category
vteGullah people topicsCultureFilm and television
Conrack (1974)
A House Divided: Denmark Vesey's Rebellion (1982)
A Soldier's Story (1984)
Glory (1989)
Daughters of the Dust (1991)
Gullah Gullah Island (1994–2000)
Publications
Bruh Rabbit and the Tar Baby Girl
Vibration Cooking
Language
Gullah language
Religion and folklore
Afro-American religion
Black church
Boo Hag
Flying Africans
Hoodoo
Mojo
Black cat bone
Goofer dust
Haint blue
Hot foot powder
Julia Jackson
John the Conqueror
Rabbit's foot
Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses
Ring shout
Music and culture
Charleston red rice
Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Corridor
Kumbaya
Michael Row the Boat Ashore
Ranky Tanky
Robot Hive/Exodus
Related culture
African-American culture
Culture of Africa
HistoryHistory topics
Bilali Document
Igbo Landing
Port Royal Experiment
Stono Rebellion
Demographics
Beaufort, South Carolina
Daufuskie Island
Eulonia, Georgia
Georgia
Golden Isles of Georgia
Sapelo Island (protected site)
Hog Hammock
South Carolina Lowcountry
Related history
African-American history
Timeline of African-American history
Atlantic slave trade
History of Angola
History of Benin
History of Congo
History of Ghana
History of Guinea-Bissau
History of Liberia
History of Nigeria
Sahel / Senegambia
History of Senegal
History of the Gambia
History of Sierra Leone
Bunce Island
History of the United States
Slavery in the United States
Related ethnic groups
African Americans
Baga
Kongo
Fula
Igbo
Kissi
Jola
Kpelle
Limba
Mandinka
Mende
Susu
Temne
Vai
Wolof
Serer
Laalaa
Ndut
Niominka
Noon
Palor
Saafi
Toucouleur
Category